# Purpose

1. Purpose. The purpose of DNLS1 is to minimize the sum of the squares of M nonlinear functions in N variables by a modification of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. The user must provide a subrou- tine which calculates the functions. The user has the option of how the Jacobian will be supplied. The user can supply the full Jacobian, or the rows of the Jacobian (to avoid storing the full Jacobian), or let the code approximate the Jacobian by forward-differencing. This code is the combination of the MINPACK codes (Argonne) LMDER, LMDIF, and LMSTR. 2. Subroutine and Type Statements. SUBROUTINE DNLS1(FCN,IOPT,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC,FTOL,XTOL, GTOL,MAXFEV,EPSFCN,DIAG,MODE,FACTOR,NPRINT,INFO ,NFEV,NJEV,IPVT,QTF,WA1,WA2,WA3,WA4) INTEGER IOPT,M,N,LDFJAC,MAXFEV,MODE,NPRINT,INFO,NFEV,NJEV INTEGER IPVT(N) DOUBLE PRECISION FTOL,XTOL,GTOL,EPSFCN,FACTOR DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(LDFJAC,N),DIAG(N),QTF(N), WA1(N),WA2(N),WA3(N),WA4(M) 3. Parameters. Parameters designated as input parameters must be specified on entry to DNLS1 and are not changed on exit, while parameters designated as output parameters need not be specified on entry and are set to appropriate values on exit from DNLS1.

# Description

This canonical unsafe binding exposes original SLATEC routine `DNLS1`. Its documented behavior is taken from the selected, source-hash-verified provider prologue; the exact implementation source is [DNLS1](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/src/dnls1.f).

# Arguments

## 1. `FCN`

callback `callback` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `reviewed unsafe extern callback function pointer`, and scalar. supplied subroutine which calculate the functions.  If the user wants to supply the Jacobian must do the printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below.  FCN must be declared in an EXTERNAL statement in the calling program and should be written as follows. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) INTEGER IFLAG,LDFJAC,M,N DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M) 2, the user supplies the full 3, the user supplies one row of the Jacobian with each call.  (In this manner, storage can be saved because the full Jacobian is not stored.) 0 are made. is set as follows for function evaluation. is required for each evaluation of the full Jacobian. 1 (N calls to FCN) and 1, C     that is, if the user does not calculate the Jacobian. INTEGER I,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2, C     that is, if the user calculates the full Jacobian. C INTEGER I,LDFJAC,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(LDFJAC,N),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF(IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 3, C     that is, if the user calculates the Jacobian row by row. INTEGER I,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(N),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF( IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 The callback must remain valid for the complete native call, satisfy the exact reviewed ABI, and must not unwind into Fortran. supplied subroutine which calculate the functions.  If the user wants to supply the Jacobian must do the printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below.  FCN must be declared in an EXTERNAL statement in the calling program and should be written as follows. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) INTEGER IFLAG,LDFJAC,M,N DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M) 2, the user supplies the full 3, the user supplies one row of the Jacobian with each call.  (In this manner, storage can be saved because the full Jacobian is not stored.) 0 are made. is set as follows for function evaluation. is required for each evaluation of the full Jacobian. 1 (N calls to FCN) and 1, C     that is, if the user does not calculate the Jacobian. INTEGER I,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2, C     that is, if the user calculates the full Jacobian. C INTEGER I,LDFJAC,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(LDFJAC,N),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF(IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 3, C     that is, if the user calculates the Jacobian row by row. INTEGER I,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(N),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF( IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 2. `IOPT`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. 2 or 3), then FCN must be written to calculate the Jacobian, as well as the functions.  See the explanation of the IOPT argument below. If the user wants the iterates printed (NPRINT positive), then 1. 2. 3. 2.  FVEC contains the function values at X and must not be altered.  FJAC(I,J) must be set to the derivative of FVEC(I) with respect to X(J). RETURN 3.  FVEC contains the function values at X and must not be altered.  FJAC(J) must be set to the derivative of FVEC(LDFJAC) with respect to X(J). RETURN is an input variable which specifies how the Jacobian will 2 or 3, then the user must supply the Jacobian, as well as the function values, through the 2, the user supplies the full 3, the user supplies one row of the Jacobian with each call.  (In this manner, storage can be saved because the full Jacobian is not stored.) 1, the code will approximate the Jacobian by forward differencing. 1 and 2, FJAC is an M by N 3, FJAC is an N by N array.  The upper N by N submatrix of FJAC contains an upper triangular matrix R with diagonal elements of nonincreasing magnitude such that T     T           T P *(JAC *JAC)*P = R *R, where P is a permutation matrix and JAC is the final calcu- lated Jacobian.  Column J of P is column IPVT(J) (see below) of the identity matrix.  The lower part of FJAC contains information generated during the computation of R. 1 and 2, 3, LDFJAC must not be less than N. 2 or 3, then EPSFCN can be ignored (treat it as a dummy argument). 2, only one call to 3, the M calls to FCN are required. 1, then NJEV is set to zero. 1, then the validity of the answer can be checked, for example, by rerunning DNLS1 with tighter tolerances. First Convergence Test.  If ENORM(Z) denotes the Euclidean norm of a vector Z, then this test attempts to guarantee that 1 or 2 1 or 2 3 LDFJAC .LT. N, or FTOL .LT. 0.E0, or XTOL .LT. 0.E0, or GTOL .LT. 0.E0, or MAXFEV .LE. 0, or 2 or 3 and 200*(N+1) for 1.  If the number of calls to FCN reaches MAXFEV, then this indicates that the routine is converging very slowly 2 (one 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of DNLS1 will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. Long Description: 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 1 1, C     that is, if the user does not calculate the Jacobian. INTEGER I,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2, FCN would be modified as follows to also calculate the full Jacobian when IFLAG=2. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) C 2, C     that is, if the user calculates the full Jacobian. C INTEGER I,LDFJAC,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(LDFJAC,N),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF(IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 3, FJAC would be dimensioned as FJAC(3,3), 3, C     that is, if the user calculates the Jacobian row by row. INTEGER I,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(N),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF( IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2 or 3), then FCN must be written to calculate the Jacobian, as well as the functions.  See the explanation of the IOPT argument below. If the user wants the iterates printed (NPRINT positive), then 1. 2. 3. 2.  FVEC contains the function values at X and must not be altered.  FJAC(I,J) must be set to the derivative of FVEC(I) with respect to X(J). RETURN 3.  FVEC contains the function values at X and must not be altered.  FJAC(J) must be set to the derivative of FVEC(LDFJAC) with respect to X(J). RETURN is an input variable which specifies how the Jacobian will 2 or 3, then the user must supply the Jacobian, as well as the function values, through the 2, the user supplies the full 3, the user supplies one row of the Jacobian with each call.  (In this manner, storage can be saved because the full Jacobian is not stored.) 1, the code will approximate the Jacobian by forward differencing. 1 and 2, FJAC is an M by N 3, FJAC is an N by N array.  The upper N by N submatrix of FJAC contains an upper triangular matrix R with diagonal elements of nonincreasing magnitude such that T     T           T P *(JAC *JAC)*P = R *R, where P is a permutation matrix and JAC is the final calcu- lated Jacobian.  Column J of P is column IPVT(J) (see below) of the identity matrix.  The lower part of FJAC contains information generated during the computation of R. 1 and 2, 3, LDFJAC must not be less than N. 2 or 3, then EPSFCN can be ignored (treat it as a dummy argument). 2, only one call to 3, the M calls to FCN are required. 1, then NJEV is set to zero. 1, then the validity of the answer can be checked, for example, by rerunning DNLS1 with tighter tolerances. First Convergence Test.  If ENORM(Z) denotes the Euclidean norm of a vector Z, then this test attempts to guarantee that 1 or 2 1 or 2 3 LDFJAC .LT. N, or FTOL .LT. 0.E0, or XTOL .LT. 0.E0, or GTOL .LT. 0.E0, or MAXFEV .LE. 0, or 2 or 3 and 200*(N+1) for 1.  If the number of calls to FCN reaches MAXFEV, then this indicates that the routine is converging very slowly 2 (one 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of DNLS1 will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. Long Description: 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 1 1, C     that is, if the user does not calculate the Jacobian. INTEGER I,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2, FCN would be modified as follows to also calculate the full Jacobian when IFLAG=2. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) C 2, C     that is, if the user calculates the full Jacobian. C INTEGER I,LDFJAC,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(LDFJAC,N),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF(IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 3, FJAC would be dimensioned as FJAC(3,3), 3, C     that is, if the user calculates the Jacobian row by row. INTEGER I,M,N,IFLAG DOUBLE PRECISION X(N),FVEC(M),FJAC(N),Y(15) DOUBLE PRECISION TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF( IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 3. `M`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is a positive integer input variable set to the number of functions. contains the functions evaluated at the output X. 3, LDFJAC must not be less than N. 1 or 2 3 LDFJAC .LT. N, or FTOL .LT. 0.E0, or XTOL .LT. 0.E0, or GTOL .LT. 0.E0, or MAXFEV .LE. 0, or racy requested, and the starting point.  The number of arith- metic operations needed by DNLS1 is about N**3 to process each evaluation of the functions (call to FCN) and to process each 2 (one 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of DNLS1 will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. Long Description: 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 15 is a positive integer input variable set to the number of functions. contains the functions evaluated at the output X. 3, LDFJAC must not be less than N. 1 or 2 3 LDFJAC .LT. N, or FTOL .LT. 0.E0, or XTOL .LT. 0.E0, or GTOL .LT. 0.E0, or MAXFEV .LE. 0, or racy requested, and the starting point.  The number of arith- metic operations needed by DNLS1 is about N**3 to process each evaluation of the functions (call to FCN) and to process each 2 (one 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of DNLS1 will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. Long Description: 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 15 not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 4. `N`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. Marquardt algorithm. 2. 3. is a positive integer input variable set to the number of variables.  N must not exceed M. contain an initial estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the final estimate of the solution vector. 1 (see below), DIAG is contains the first N elements of the vector (Q transpose)*FVEC. 1 or 2 1 or 2 2 or 3 and 200*(N+1) for racy requested, and the starting point.  The number of arith- metic operations needed by DNLS1 is about N**3 to process each evaluation of the functions (call to FCN) and to process each 2 (one 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of DNLS1 will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. declared storage arrays. Long Description: Long Description: 7. Example. 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 3 C C     The following starting values provide a rough fit. C Marquardt algorithm. 2. 3. is a positive integer input variable set to the number of variables.  N must not exceed M. contain an initial estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the final estimate of the solution vector. 1 (see below), DIAG is contains the first N elements of the vector (Q transpose)*FVEC. 1 or 2 1 or 2 2 or 3 and 200*(N+1) for racy requested, and the starting point.  The number of arith- metic operations needed by DNLS1 is about N**3 to process each evaluation of the functions (call to FCN) and to process each 2 (one 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of DNLS1 will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. declared storage arrays. Long Description: Long Description: 7. Example. 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 3 C C     The following starting values provide a rough fit. C not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 5. `X`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). are available for printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below. IFLAG will never be zero unless NPRINT is positive. must not be changed. RETURN contain an initial contain an initial estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the final estimate of the solution vector. final estimate of the solution vector. and a solution XSOL.  DNLS1 terminates when any of the tests is satisfied.  If any of the convergence parameters is less than the machine precision (as defined by the function R1MACH(4)), then DNLS1 only attempts to satisfy the test defined by the machine precision.  Further progress is not usually possible. The tests assume that the functions are reasonably well behaved, and, if the Jacobian is supplied by the user, that the functions and the Jacobian are coded consistently.  If these conditions are not satisfied, then DNLS1 may incorrectly indicate conver- XSOL)) .LE. XTOL*ENORM(D*XSOL). 1, 15 1, 15 1, 15 to the data to the data to the data Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). PROGRAM TEST PROGRAM TEST PROGRAM TEST C C C C     Driver for DNLS1 example. C     Driver for DNLS1 example. C     Driver for DNLS1 example. C C C INTEGER J,IOPT,M,N,LDFJAC,MAXFEV,MODE,NPRINT,INFO,NFEV,NJEV, INTEGER J,IOPT,M,N,LDFJAC,MAXFEV,MODE,NPRINT,INFO,NFEV,NJEV, INTEGER J,IOPT,M,N,LDFJAC,MAXFEV,MODE,NPRINT,INFO,NFEV,NJEV, NWRITE NWRITE NWRITE INTEGER IPVT(3) INTEGER IPVT(3) INTEGER IPVT(3) DOUBLE PRECISION FTOL,XTOL,GTOL,FACTOR,FNORM,EPSFCN DOUBLE PRECISION FTOL,XTOL,GTOL,FACTOR,FNORM,EPSFCN DOUBLE PRECISION FTOL,XTOL,GTOL,FACTOR,FNORM,EPSFCN DOUBLE PRECISION X(3),FVEC(15),FJAC(15,3),DIAG(3),QTF(3), DOUBLE PRECISION X(3),FVEC(15),FJAC(15,3),DIAG(3),QTF(3), DOUBLE PRECISION X(3),FVEC(15),FJAC(15,3),DIAG(3),QTF(3), 1.E0 1.E0 1.E0 C 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' NUMBER OF FUNCTION EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' NUMBER OF JACOBIAN EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) are available for printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below. IFLAG will never be zero unless NPRINT is positive. must not be changed. RETURN contain an initial contain an initial estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the final estimate of the solution vector. final estimate of the solution vector. and a solution XSOL.  DNLS1 terminates when any of the tests is satisfied.  If any of the convergence parameters is less than the machine precision (as defined by the function R1MACH(4)), then DNLS1 only attempts to satisfy the test defined by the machine precision.  Further progress is not usually possible. The tests assume that the functions are reasonably well behaved, and, if the Jacobian is supplied by the user, that the functions and the Jacobian are coded consistently.  If these conditions are not satisfied, then DNLS1 may incorrectly indicate conver- XSOL)) .LE. XTOL*ENORM(D*XSOL). 1, 15 1, 15 1, 15 to the data to the data to the data Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). PROGRAM TEST PROGRAM TEST PROGRAM TEST C C C C     Driver for DNLS1 example. C     Driver for DNLS1 example. C     Driver for DNLS1 example. C C C INTEGER J,IOPT,M,N,LDFJAC,MAXFEV,MODE,NPRINT,INFO,NFEV,NJEV, INTEGER J,IOPT,M,N,LDFJAC,MAXFEV,MODE,NPRINT,INFO,NFEV,NJEV, INTEGER J,IOPT,M,N,LDFJAC,MAXFEV,MODE,NPRINT,INFO,NFEV,NJEV, NWRITE NWRITE NWRITE INTEGER IPVT(3) INTEGER IPVT(3) INTEGER IPVT(3) DOUBLE PRECISION FTOL,XTOL,GTOL,FACTOR,FNORM,EPSFCN DOUBLE PRECISION FTOL,XTOL,GTOL,FACTOR,FNORM,EPSFCN DOUBLE PRECISION FTOL,XTOL,GTOL,FACTOR,FNORM,EPSFCN DOUBLE PRECISION X(3),FVEC(15),FJAC(15,3),DIAG(3),QTF(3), DOUBLE PRECISION X(3),FVEC(15),FJAC(15,3),DIAG(3),QTF(3), DOUBLE PRECISION X(3),FVEC(15),FJAC(15,3),DIAG(3),QTF(3), 1.E0 1.E0 1.E0 C 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' NUMBER OF FUNCTION EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' NUMBER OF JACOBIAN EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 6. `FVEC`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). are available for printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below. IFLAG will never be zero unless NPRINT is positive. must not be changed. RETURN contains the functions evaluated at the output X. is not positive, no .LE. (1+FTOL)*ENORM(FVECS), where FVECS denotes the functions evaluated at XSOL.  If this is set to 5. In this case, it may be helpful to restart DNLS1 with MODE set to 1. 6. Characteristics of the Algorithm. DNLS1 is a modification of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. Two of its main characteristics involve the proper use of (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN END Results obtained with different compilers or machines may be slightly different. FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS  0.9063596E-01 NUMBER OF FUNCTION EVALUATIONS        25 NUMBER OF JACOBIAN EVALUATIONS         0 EXIT PARAMETER                         1 FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 0.8241058E-01  0.1133037E+01  0.2343695E+01 (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN C C     Below, calculate the full Jacobian. C 20    CONTINUE C DO 30 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN C are available for printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below. IFLAG will never be zero unless NPRINT is positive. must not be changed. RETURN contains the functions evaluated at the output X. is not positive, no .LE. (1+FTOL)*ENORM(FVECS), where FVECS denotes the functions evaluated at XSOL.  If this is set to 5. In this case, it may be helpful to restart DNLS1 with MODE set to 1. 6. Characteristics of the Algorithm. DNLS1 is a modification of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. Two of its main characteristics involve the proper use of (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN END Results obtained with different compilers or machines may be slightly different. FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS  0.9063596E-01 NUMBER OF FUNCTION EVALUATIONS        25 NUMBER OF JACOBIAN EVALUATIONS         0 EXIT PARAMETER                         1 FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 0.8241058E-01  0.1133037E+01  0.2343695E+01 (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN C C     Below, calculate the full Jacobian. C 20    CONTINUE C DO 30 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN C not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 7. `FJAC`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 2; dimensions (LDFJAC, *). 1. 2. 3. 1 and 2, FJAC is an M by N 1 and 2, 1.E0 TMP1*TMP2/TMP4 TMP1*TMP3/TMP4 30    CONTINUE RETURN END 1.E0 TMP1*TMP2/TMP4 TMP1*TMP3/TMP4 RETURN END not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 8. `LDFJAC`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. 1. 2. th row of the Jacobian and return this vector in FJAC.  Note that IFLAG will is a positive integer input variable which specifies 3, LDFJAC must not be less than N. 3 LDFJAC .LT. N, or FTOL .LT. 0.E0, or XTOL .LT. 0.E0, or GTOL .LT. 0.E0, or MAXFEV .LE. 0, or 15 C C     Set FTOL and XTOL to the square root of the machine precision C     and GTOL to zero.  Unless high precision solutions are C     required, these are the recommended settings. C would be set to 3, and FCN would be written as follows to calculate a row of the Jacobian when IFLAG=3. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) th row of the Jacobian. C 20 CONTINUE I = LDFJAC TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 1. 2. th row of the Jacobian and return this vector in FJAC.  Note that IFLAG will is a positive integer input variable which specifies 3, LDFJAC must not be less than N. 3 LDFJAC .LT. N, or FTOL .LT. 0.E0, or XTOL .LT. 0.E0, or GTOL .LT. 0.E0, or MAXFEV .LE. 0, or 15 C C     Set FTOL and XTOL to the square root of the machine precision C     and GTOL to zero.  Unless high precision solutions are C     required, these are the recommended settings. C would be set to 3, and FCN would be written as follows to calculate a row of the Jacobian when IFLAG=3. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) th row of the Jacobian. C 20 CONTINUE I = LDFJAC TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 1. 2. th row of the Jacobian and return this vector in FJAC.  Note that IFLAG will is a positive integer input variable which specifies 3, LDFJAC must not be less than N. 3 LDFJAC .LT. N, or FTOL .LT. 0.E0, or XTOL .LT. 0.E0, or GTOL .LT. 0.E0, or MAXFEV .LE. 0, or 15 C C     Set FTOL and XTOL to the square root of the machine precision C     and GTOL to zero.  Unless high precision solutions are C     required, these are the recommended settings. C would be set to 3, and FCN would be written as follows to calculate a row of the Jacobian when IFLAG=3. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) th row of the Jacobian. C 20 CONTINUE I = LDFJAC TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 not a workspace argument

## 9. `FTOL`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and scalar. negative input variable.  Termination occurs when both the actual and predicted relative reductions in the sum of squares are at most FTOL.  Therefore, FTOL measures the relative error desired in the sum of squares.  Section 4 con- tains more details about FTOL. are used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation K), then the final residual norm ENORM(FVEC) has K significant decimal digits and SQRT(R1MACH(4)) not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 10. `XTOL`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and scalar. negative input variable.  Termination occurs when the relative error between two consecutive iterates is at most Therefore, XTOL measures the relative error desired in the approximate solution.  Section 4 contains more details about XTOL. are used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation K), then the larger components of D*X have K significant decimal digits and SQRT(R1MACH(4)) negative input variable.  Termination occurs when the relative error between two consecutive iterates is at most Therefore, XTOL measures the relative error desired in the approximate solution.  Section 4 contains more details about XTOL. are used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation K), then the larger components of D*X have K significant decimal digits and SQRT(R1MACH(4)) not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 11. `GTOL`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and scalar. negative input variable.  Termination occurs when the cosine of the angle between FVEC and any column of the Jacobian is at most GTOL in absolute value.  Therefore, GTOL measures the orthogonality desired between the function vector and the columns of the Jacobian.  Section 4 contains more details about GTOL. are used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation tionship between this test and the accuracy of DNLS1, and furthermore, the test is equally well satisfied at other crit- ical points, namely maximizers and saddle points.  Therefore, 0.E0 C not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 12. `MAXFEV`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is a positive integer input variable.  Termination occurs when the number of calls to FCN to evaluate the functions has reached MAXFEV. 2 or 3 and 200*(N+1) for 400 not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 13. `EPSFCN`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and scalar. is an input variable used in determining a suitable step for the forward-difference approximation.  This approximation assumes that the relative errors in the functions are of the sion, it is assumed that the relative errors in the functions sion, it is assumed that the relative errors in the functions 0.0 not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 14. `DIAG`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). 1 (see below), DIAG is are equivalent not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 15. `MODE`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. 1 (see below), DIAG is 2, DIAG must contain positive entries that serve as implicit (multiplicative) scale factors for the variables. 1, the variables 1, the variables are equivalent 1. 1, then the accuracy of the components of X is usually related to their sensitivity.  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for XTOL is the square root of the machine precision. Third Convergence Test.  This test is satisfied when the cosine of the angle between FVEC and any column of the Jacobian at X 1) and an optimal choice for the correction.  The use of implicitly scaled variables achieves scale invariance of DNLS1 and limits the size of the correction in any direction where the functions are changing rapidly.  The optimal choice of the correction guarantees (under reasonable conditions) global convergence from starting points far from the solution and a fast rate of convergence for problems with small residuals. Timing.  The time required by DNLS1 to solve a given problem 1 1 (see below), DIAG is 2, DIAG must contain positive entries that serve as implicit (multiplicative) scale factors for the variables. 1, the variables 1, the variables are equivalent 1. 1, then the accuracy of the components of X is usually related to their sensitivity.  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for XTOL is the square root of the machine precision. Third Convergence Test.  This test is satisfied when the cosine of the angle between FVEC and any column of the Jacobian at X 1) and an optimal choice for the correction.  The use of implicitly scaled variables achieves scale invariance of DNLS1 and limits the size of the correction in any direction where the functions are changing rapidly.  The optimal choice of the correction guarantees (under reasonable conditions) global convergence from starting points far from the solution and a fast rate of convergence for problems with small residuals. Timing.  The time required by DNLS1 to solve a given problem 1 not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 16. `FACTOR`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and scalar. tial step bound.  This bound is set to the product of FACTOR and the Euclidean norm of DIAG*X if nonzero, or else to FACTOR itself.  In most cases FACTOR should lie in the interval (.1,100.).  100. is a generally recommended value. .LE. 0.E0. Arithmetic Interrupts.  If these interrupts occur in the FCN subroutine during an early stage of the computation, they may be caused by an unacceptable choice of X by DNLS1.  In this case, it may be possible to remedy the situation by rerunning DNLS1 with a smaller value of FACTOR. Excessive Number of Function Evaluations.  A reasonable value 1.E2 not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 17. `NPRINT`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is an integer input variable that enables controlled printing of iterates if it is positive.  In this case, FCN is called with IFLAG = 0 at the beginning of the first iteration and every NPRINT iterations thereafter and immediately prior to return, with X and FVEC available for printing. Appropriate print statements must be added to FCN (see example) and is not positive, no 0 C CALL DNLS1(FCN,IOPT,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC,FTOL,XTOL, is an integer input variable that enables controlled printing of iterates if it is positive.  In this case, FCN is called with IFLAG = 0 at the beginning of the first iteration and every NPRINT iterations thereafter and immediately prior to return, with X and FVEC available for printing. Appropriate print statements must be added to FCN (see example) and is not positive, no 0 C CALL DNLS1(FCN,IOPT,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC,FTOL,XTOL, not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 18. `INFO`

status-output `status` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is an integer output variable.  If the user has terminated execution, INFO is set to the (negative) value of IFLAG.  See is set as follows 0  improper input parameters. 1  both actual and predicted relative reductions in the sum of squares are at most FTOL. 2  relative error between two consecutive iterates is at most XTOL. 3  conditions for INFO = 1 and INFO = 2 both hold. 4  the cosine of the angle between FVEC and any column of the Jacobian is at most GTOL in absolute value. 5  number of calls to FCN for function evaluation has reached MAXFEV. 6  FTOL is too small.  No further reduction in the sum of squares is possible. 7  XTOL is too small.  No further improvement in the approximate solution X is possible. 8  GTOL is too small.  FVEC is orthogonal to the columns of the Jacobian to machine precision. Sections 4 and 5 contain more details about INFO. fied).  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for FTOL is the square root of the machine precision. Second Convergence Test.  If D is the diagonal matrix whose entries are defined by the array DIAG, then this test attempts to guarantee that fied).  There is a danger that the smaller components of D*X 4) should be examined carefully.  The recommended value for GTOL is zero. 5. Unsuccessful Completion. Unsuccessful termination of DNLS1 can be due to improper input parameters, arithmetic interrupts, or an excessive number of function evaluations. Improper Input Parameters.  INFO is set to 0 if IOPT .LT. 1 is set to 5. In this case, it may be helpful to restart DNLS1 with MODE set to 1. 6. Characteristics of the Algorithm. DNLS1 is a modification of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. Two of its main characteristics involve the proper use of FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' NUMBER OF FUNCTION EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' NUMBER OF JACOBIAN EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) is an integer output variable.  If the user has terminated execution, INFO is set to the (negative) value of IFLAG.  See is set as follows 0  improper input parameters. 1  both actual and predicted relative reductions in the sum of squares are at most FTOL. 2  relative error between two consecutive iterates is at most XTOL. 3  conditions for INFO = 1 and INFO = 2 both hold. 4  the cosine of the angle between FVEC and any column of the Jacobian is at most GTOL in absolute value. 5  number of calls to FCN for function evaluation has reached MAXFEV. 6  FTOL is too small.  No further reduction in the sum of squares is possible. 7  XTOL is too small.  No further improvement in the approximate solution X is possible. 8  GTOL is too small.  FVEC is orthogonal to the columns of the Jacobian to machine precision. Sections 4 and 5 contain more details about INFO. fied).  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for FTOL is the square root of the machine precision. Second Convergence Test.  If D is the diagonal matrix whose entries are defined by the array DIAG, then this test attempts to guarantee that fied).  There is a danger that the smaller components of D*X 4) should be examined carefully.  The recommended value for GTOL is zero. 5. Unsuccessful Completion. Unsuccessful termination of DNLS1 can be due to improper input parameters, arithmetic interrupts, or an excessive number of function evaluations. Improper Input Parameters.  INFO is set to 0 if IOPT .LT. 1 is set to 5. In this case, it may be helpful to restart DNLS1 with MODE set to 1. 6. Characteristics of the Algorithm. DNLS1 is a modification of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. Two of its main characteristics involve the proper use of FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' NUMBER OF FUNCTION EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' NUMBER OF JACOBIAN EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 19. `NFEV`

input-output `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is an integer output variable set to the number of calls to FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' NUMBER OF FUNCTION EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' NUMBER OF JACOBIAN EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 20. `NJEV`

input-output `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is an integer output variable set to the number of FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' NUMBER OF FUNCTION EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' NUMBER OF JACOBIAN EVALUATIONS',I10 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 21. `IPVT`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). is an integer output array of length N.  IPVT defines a permutation matrix P such that JAC*P = Q*R, where JAC is the final calculated Jacobian, Q is orthogonal (not stored), and R is upper triangular with diagonal elements of nonincreasing magnitude.  Column J of P is column IPVT(J) of the identity matrix. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) is an integer output array of length N.  IPVT defines a permutation matrix P such that JAC*P = Q*R, where JAC is the final calculated Jacobian, Q is orthogonal (not stored), and R is upper triangular with diagonal elements of nonincreasing magnitude.  Column J of P is column IPVT(J) of the identity matrix. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 22. `QTF`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). contains the first N elements of the vector (Q transpose)*FVEC. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 23. `WA1`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not applicable or not stated by selected source

## 24. `WA2`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not applicable or not stated by selected source

## 25. `WA3`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not applicable or not stated by selected source

## 26. `WA4`

input-output `array` argument; Fortran declaration `DOUBLE PRECISION`, Rust ABI type `*mut f64`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). is a work array of length M. 4. Successful Completion. The accuracy of DNLS1 is controlled by the convergence parame- DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) is a work array of length M. 4. Successful Completion. The accuracy of DNLS1 is controlled by the convergence parame- DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not applicable or not stated by selected source

# Return value

This is a Fortran subroutine and has no direct return value. Its results, status, and any persistent solver state are communicated through the documented arguments.

# Callback contract

Callback arguments use the reviewed ABI shown by their Rust function-pointer type. They are invoked synchronously by the native call, must remain valid until it returns, must uphold every documented input/output extent, and **must not unwind** through Fortran. A callback must not retain or free caller-owned native buffers unless the source contract expressly permits it.

# Status and error values

The selected source has no separate status-code section. Status output arguments, if present, are identified in the argument contract; legacy SLATEC error-runtime behavior remains part of the native provider contract.

# Workspace and array requirements

- `FCN`: not a workspace argument
- `IOPT`: not a workspace argument
- `M`: not a workspace argument
- `N`: not a workspace argument
- `X`: not a workspace argument
- `FVEC`: not a workspace argument
- `FJAC`: not a workspace argument
- `LDFJAC`: not a workspace argument
- `FTOL`: not a workspace argument
- `XTOL`: not a workspace argument
- `GTOL`: not a workspace argument
- `MAXFEV`: not a workspace argument
- `EPSFCN`: not a workspace argument
- `DIAG`: not a workspace argument
- `MODE`: not a workspace argument
- `FACTOR`: not a workspace argument
- `NPRINT`: not a workspace argument
- `INFO`: not a workspace argument
- `NFEV`: not a workspace argument
- `NJEV`: not a workspace argument
- `IPVT`: not a workspace argument
- `QTF`: not a workspace argument
- `WA1`: are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC)
- `WA2`: are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC)
- `WA3`: are work arrays of length N. DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC)
- `WA4`: is a work array of length M. 4. Successful Completion. The accuracy of DNLS1 is controlled by the convergence parame- DOUBLE PRECISION DENORM,D1MACH EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ C FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC)

# ABI notes

- Canonical Rust path: `slatec_sys::least_squares::dnls1`
- Original SLATEC routine: `DNLS1`
- Native symbol: `dnls1_`
- ABI fingerprint: `unavailable`
- Exact Netlib source file: [DNLS1](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/src/dnls1.f)

# Safety

Every raw pointer must be non-null unless this argument contract expressly permits null, correctly aligned, and valid for its documented readable or writable extent. Preserve Fortran column-major layout, length, leading-dimension, workspace, callback-lifetime, aliasing, and provider-runtime requirements. The native routine does not retain ordinary argument pointers beyond this call.
