# Purpose

1. Purpose. The purpose of SNLS1E is to minimize the sum of the squares of M nonlinear functions in N variables by a modification of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. This is done by using the more general least-squares solver SNLS1. The user must provide a subroutine which calculates the functions. The user has the option of how the Jacobian will be supplied. The user can supply the full Jacobian, or the rows of the Jacobian (to avoid storing the full Jacobian), or let the code approximate the Jacobian by forward-differencing. This code is the combination of the MINPACK codes (Argonne) LMDER1, LMDIF1, and LMSTR1. 2. Subroutine and Type Statements. SUBROUTINE SNLS1E(FCN,IOPT,M,N,X,FVEC,TOL,NPRINT, INFO,IW,WA,LWA) INTEGER IOPT,M,N,NPRINT,INFO,LWA INTEGER IW(N) REAL TOL REAL X(N),FVEC(M),WA(LWA) EXTERNAL FCN 3. Parameters. Parameters designated as input parameters must be specified on entry to SNLS1E and are not changed on exit, while parameters designated as output parameters need not be specified on entry and are set to appropriate values on exit from SNLS1E.

# Description

This canonical unsafe binding exposes original SLATEC routine `SNLS1E`. Its documented behavior is taken from the selected, source-hash-verified provider prologue; the exact implementation source is [SNLS1E](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/src/snls1e.f).

# Arguments

## 1. `FCN`

callback `callback` argument; Fortran declaration `REAL`, Rust ABI type `reviewed unsafe extern callback function pointer`, and scalar. supplied subroutine which calculates the functions.  If the user wants to supply the Jacobian must do the printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below.  FCN must be declared in an EXTERNAL statement in the calling program and should be written as follows. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) INTEGER IFLAG,LDFJAC,M,N REAL X(N),FVEC(M) 2, the user supplies the full 3, the user supplies one row of the Jacobian with each call.  (In this manner, storage can be saved because the full Jacobian is not stored.) 0 are made. is set as follows. 2 or 3 or 200*(N+1) 1, C     that is, if the user does not calculate the Jacobian. INTEGER M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2, C     that is, if the user calculates the full Jacobian. C INTEGER LDFJAC,M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) REAL FJAC(LDFJAC,N) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF(IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 3, C     that is, if the user calculates the Jacobian row by row. INTEGER M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) REAL FJAC(N) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF( IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 The callback must remain valid for the complete native call, satisfy the exact reviewed ABI, and must not unwind into Fortran. supplied subroutine which calculates the functions.  If the user wants to supply the Jacobian must do the printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below.  FCN must be declared in an EXTERNAL statement in the calling program and should be written as follows. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) INTEGER IFLAG,LDFJAC,M,N REAL X(N),FVEC(M) 2, the user supplies the full 3, the user supplies one row of the Jacobian with each call.  (In this manner, storage can be saved because the full Jacobian is not stored.) 0 are made. is set as follows. 2 or 3 or 200*(N+1) 1, C     that is, if the user does not calculate the Jacobian. INTEGER M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2, C     that is, if the user calculates the full Jacobian. C INTEGER LDFJAC,M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) REAL FJAC(LDFJAC,N) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF(IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 3, C     that is, if the user calculates the Jacobian row by row. INTEGER M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) REAL FJAC(N) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF( IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 2. `IOPT`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. 2 or 3), then FCN must be written to calculate the Jacobian, as well as the functions.  See the explanation of the IOPT argument below. If the user wants the iterates printed (NPRINT positive), then 1. 2. 3. 2.  FVEC contains the function values at X and must not be altered.  FJAC(I,J) must be set to the derivative of FVEC(I) with respect to X(J). RETURN 3.  FVEC contains the function values at X and must not be altered.  FJAC(J) must be set to the derivative of FVEC(LDFJAC) with respect to X(J). RETURN is an input variable which specifies how the Jacobian will 2 or 3, then the user must supply the Jacobian, as well as the function values, through the 2, the user supplies the full 3, the user supplies one row of the Jacobian with each call.  (In this manner, storage can be saved because the full Jacobian is not stored.) 1, the code will approximate the Jacobian by forward differencing. 2 or 3 or 200*(N+1) for IOPT=1. 1 and 2 or N*(N+5)+M for IOPT=3. 4. Successful Completion. The accuracy of SNLS1E is controlled by the convergence parame- ter TOL.  This parameter is used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation X and a solution XSOL. SNLS1E terminates when any of the tests is satisfied.  If TOL is less than the machine precision (as defined by the function R1MACH(4)), then SNLS1E only attempts to satisfy the test defined by the machine precision.  Further progress is not usu- ally possible.  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for TOL is the square root of the machine precision. The tests assume that the functions are reasonably well behaved, and, if the Jacobian is supplied by the user, that the functions and the Jacobian are coded consistently.  If these conditions are not satisfied, then SNLS1E may incorrectly indicate conver- 1, then the validity of the answer can be checked, for example, by rerunning SNLS1E with tighter tolerances. First Convergence Test.  If ENORM(Z) denotes the Euclidean norm of a vector Z, then this test attempts to guarantee that 1 or 2 LWA .LT. N*(M+5)+M, or for IOPT=3 2 or 3 or 200*(N+1) 1, then this indicates that the routine is converging very slowly as measured by the progress of FVEC, and INFO is set to 5.  In this case, it may be helpful to restart SNLS1E, thereby forcing it to disregard old (and possibly harmful) information. 6. Characteristics of the Algorithm. SNLS1E is a modification of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. Two of its main characteristics involve the proper use of implicitly scaled variables and an optimal choice for the cor- rection.  The use of implicitly scaled variables achieves scale invariance of SNLS1E and limits the size of the correction in any direction where the functions are changing rapidly.  The optimal choice of the correction guarantees (under reasonable conditions) global convergence from starting points far from the solution and a fast rate of convergence for problems with small residuals. Timing.  The time required by SNLS1E to solve a given problem 2 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of SNLS1E will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. Long Description: 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 1 1, C     that is, if the user does not calculate the Jacobian. INTEGER M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2, FCN would be modified as follows to also calculate the full Jacobian when IFLAG=2. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) C 2, C     that is, if the user calculates the full Jacobian. C INTEGER LDFJAC,M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) REAL FJAC(LDFJAC,N) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF(IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 3, FJAC would be dimensioned as FJAC(3,3), LDFJAC would be set to 3, and FCN would be written as follows to calculate a row of the Jacobian when IFLAG=3. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) 3, C     that is, if the user calculates the Jacobian row by row. INTEGER M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) REAL FJAC(N) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF( IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2 or 3), then FCN must be written to calculate the Jacobian, as well as the functions.  See the explanation of the IOPT argument below. If the user wants the iterates printed (NPRINT positive), then 1. 2. 3. 2.  FVEC contains the function values at X and must not be altered.  FJAC(I,J) must be set to the derivative of FVEC(I) with respect to X(J). RETURN 3.  FVEC contains the function values at X and must not be altered.  FJAC(J) must be set to the derivative of FVEC(LDFJAC) with respect to X(J). RETURN is an input variable which specifies how the Jacobian will 2 or 3, then the user must supply the Jacobian, as well as the function values, through the 2, the user supplies the full 3, the user supplies one row of the Jacobian with each call.  (In this manner, storage can be saved because the full Jacobian is not stored.) 1, the code will approximate the Jacobian by forward differencing. 2 or 3 or 200*(N+1) for IOPT=1. 1 and 2 or N*(N+5)+M for IOPT=3. 4. Successful Completion. The accuracy of SNLS1E is controlled by the convergence parame- ter TOL.  This parameter is used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation X and a solution XSOL. SNLS1E terminates when any of the tests is satisfied.  If TOL is less than the machine precision (as defined by the function R1MACH(4)), then SNLS1E only attempts to satisfy the test defined by the machine precision.  Further progress is not usu- ally possible.  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for TOL is the square root of the machine precision. The tests assume that the functions are reasonably well behaved, and, if the Jacobian is supplied by the user, that the functions and the Jacobian are coded consistently.  If these conditions are not satisfied, then SNLS1E may incorrectly indicate conver- 1, then the validity of the answer can be checked, for example, by rerunning SNLS1E with tighter tolerances. First Convergence Test.  If ENORM(Z) denotes the Euclidean norm of a vector Z, then this test attempts to guarantee that 1 or 2 LWA .LT. N*(M+5)+M, or for IOPT=3 2 or 3 or 200*(N+1) 1, then this indicates that the routine is converging very slowly as measured by the progress of FVEC, and INFO is set to 5.  In this case, it may be helpful to restart SNLS1E, thereby forcing it to disregard old (and possibly harmful) information. 6. Characteristics of the Algorithm. SNLS1E is a modification of the Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm. Two of its main characteristics involve the proper use of implicitly scaled variables and an optimal choice for the cor- rection.  The use of implicitly scaled variables achieves scale invariance of SNLS1E and limits the size of the correction in any direction where the functions are changing rapidly.  The optimal choice of the correction guarantees (under reasonable conditions) global convergence from starting points far from the solution and a fast rate of convergence for problems with small residuals. Timing.  The time required by SNLS1E to solve a given problem 2 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of SNLS1E will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. Long Description: 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 1 1, C     that is, if the user does not calculate the Jacobian. INTEGER M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 2, FCN would be modified as follows to also calculate the full Jacobian when IFLAG=2. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) C 2, C     that is, if the user calculates the full Jacobian. C INTEGER LDFJAC,M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) REAL FJAC(LDFJAC,N) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF(IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 3, FJAC would be dimensioned as FJAC(3,3), LDFJAC would be set to 3, and FCN would be written as follows to calculate a row of the Jacobian when IFLAG=3. SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,FJAC,LDFJAC) 3, C     that is, if the user calculates the Jacobian row by row. INTEGER M,N,IFLAG REAL X(N),FVEC(M) REAL FJAC(N) INTEGER I REAL TMP1,TMP2,TMP3,TMP4 REAL Y(15) DATA Y(1),Y(2),Y(3),Y(4),Y(5),Y(6),Y(7),Y(8), Y(9),Y(10),Y(11),Y(12),Y(13),Y(14),Y(15) /1.4E-1,1.8E-1,2.2E-1,2.5E-1,2.9E-1,3.2E-1,3.5E-1,3.9E-1, 3.7E-1,5.8E-1,7.3E-1,9.6E-1,1.34E0,2.1E0,4.39E0/ C IF (IFLAG .NE. 0) GO TO 5 C C     Insert print statements here when NPRINT is positive. C RETURN 5 CONTINUE IF( IFLAG.NE.1) GO TO 20 DO 10 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 3. `M`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is a positive integer input variable set to the number of functions. contains the functions evaluated at the output X. 1 and 2 or N*(N+5)+M for IOPT=3. 1 and 2 or N*(N+5)+M for IOPT=3. 4. Successful Completion. 4. Successful Completion. The accuracy of SNLS1E is controlled by the convergence parame- The accuracy of SNLS1E is controlled by the convergence parame- ter TOL.  This parameter is used in tests which make three types ter TOL.  This parameter is used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation X and a solution XSOL. of comparisons between the approximation X and a solution XSOL. SNLS1E terminates when any of the tests is satisfied.  If TOL is SNLS1E terminates when any of the tests is satisfied.  If TOL is less than the machine precision (as defined by the function less than the machine precision (as defined by the function R1MACH(4)), then SNLS1E only attempts to satisfy the test R1MACH(4)), then SNLS1E only attempts to satisfy the test defined by the machine precision.  Further progress is not usu- defined by the machine precision.  Further progress is not usu- ally possible.  Unless high precision solutions are required, ally possible.  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for TOL is the square root of the machine the recommended value for TOL is the square root of the machine precision. precision. The tests assume that the functions are reasonably well behaved, The tests assume that the functions are reasonably well behaved, and, if the Jacobian is supplied by the user, that the functions and, if the Jacobian is supplied by the user, that the functions and the Jacobian are coded consistently.  If these conditions and the Jacobian are coded consistently.  If these conditions are not satisfied, then SNLS1E may incorrectly indicate conver- are not satisfied, then SNLS1E may incorrectly indicate conver- racy requested, and the starting point.  The number of arith- metic operations needed by SNLS1E is about N**3 to process each evaluation of the functions (call to FCN) and to process 2 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of SNLS1E will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. Long Description: 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 15 not stated by selected source not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 4. `N`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. 2. 3. is a positive integer input variable set to the number of variables.  N must not exceed M. contain an initial estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the final estimate of the solution vector. 1 and 2 or N*(N+5)+M for IOPT=3. 4. Successful Completion. The accuracy of SNLS1E is controlled by the convergence parame- ter TOL.  This parameter is used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation X and a solution XSOL. SNLS1E terminates when any of the tests is satisfied.  If TOL is less than the machine precision (as defined by the function R1MACH(4)), then SNLS1E only attempts to satisfy the test defined by the machine precision.  Further progress is not usu- ally possible.  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for TOL is the square root of the machine precision. The tests assume that the functions are reasonably well behaved, and, if the Jacobian is supplied by the user, that the functions and the Jacobian are coded consistently.  If these conditions are not satisfied, then SNLS1E may incorrectly indicate conver- 2 or 3 or 200*(N+1) racy requested, and the starting point.  The number of arith- metic operations needed by SNLS1E is about N**3 to process each evaluation of the functions (call to FCN) and to process 2 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of SNLS1E will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. declared storage arrays. Long Description: Long Description: 7. Example. 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 3 C C     The following starting values provide a rough fit. C 2. 3. is a positive integer input variable set to the number of variables.  N must not exceed M. contain an initial estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the final estimate of the solution vector. 1 and 2 or N*(N+5)+M for IOPT=3. 4. Successful Completion. The accuracy of SNLS1E is controlled by the convergence parame- ter TOL.  This parameter is used in tests which make three types of comparisons between the approximation X and a solution XSOL. SNLS1E terminates when any of the tests is satisfied.  If TOL is less than the machine precision (as defined by the function R1MACH(4)), then SNLS1E only attempts to satisfy the test defined by the machine precision.  Further progress is not usu- ally possible.  Unless high precision solutions are required, the recommended value for TOL is the square root of the machine precision. The tests assume that the functions are reasonably well behaved, and, if the Jacobian is supplied by the user, that the functions and the Jacobian are coded consistently.  If these conditions are not satisfied, then SNLS1E may incorrectly indicate conver- 2 or 3 or 200*(N+1) racy requested, and the starting point.  The number of arith- metic operations needed by SNLS1E is about N**3 to process each evaluation of the functions (call to FCN) and to process 2 1 (N calls to FCN) and 3 (M calls to FCN).  Unless FCN can be evaluated quickly, the timing of SNLS1E will be strongly influenced by the time spent in FCN. 1 or 2 and 1 or 2 and 3 single precision storage 3 single precision storage locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to locations and N integer storage locations, in addition to the storage required by the program.  There are no internally the storage required by the program.  There are no internally declared storage arrays. declared storage arrays. Long Description: Long Description: 7. Example. 7. Example. The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) The problem is to determine the values of X(1), X(2), and X(3) which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of which provide the best fit (in the least squares sense) of 3 C C     The following starting values provide a rough fit. C not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 5. `X`

input `array` argument; Fortran declaration `REAL`, Rust ABI type `*mut f32`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). are available for printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below. IFLAG will never be zero unless NPRINT is positive. must not be changed. RETURN contain an initial contain an initial estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the final estimate of the solution vector. final estimate of the solution vector. and the solution is at most TOL. XSOL)) .LE.  TOL*ENORM(D*XSOL). 1, 15 1, 15 1, 15 to the data to the data to the data Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). PROGRAM TEST PROGRAM TEST PROGRAM TEST C C C C     Driver for SNLS1E example. C     Driver for SNLS1E example. C     Driver for SNLS1E example. C C C INTEGER I,IOPT,M,N,NPRINT,JNFO,LWA,NWRITE INTEGER I,IOPT,M,N,NPRINT,JNFO,LWA,NWRITE INTEGER I,IOPT,M,N,NPRINT,JNFO,LWA,NWRITE INTEGER IW(3) INTEGER IW(3) INTEGER IW(3) REAL TOL,FNORM REAL TOL,FNORM REAL TOL,FNORM REAL X(3),FVEC(15),WA(75) REAL X(3),FVEC(15),WA(75) REAL X(3),FVEC(15),WA(75) REAL ENORM,R1MACH REAL ENORM,R1MACH REAL ENORM,R1MACH EXTERNAL FCN EXTERNAL FCN EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ DATA NWRITE /6/ DATA NWRITE /6/ C C C 1.E0 1.E0 1.E0 C 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) are available for printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below. IFLAG will never be zero unless NPRINT is positive. must not be changed. RETURN contain an initial contain an initial estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the estimate of the solution vector.  On output, X contains the final estimate of the solution vector. final estimate of the solution vector. and the solution is at most TOL. XSOL)) .LE.  TOL*ENORM(D*XSOL). 1, 15 1, 15 1, 15 to the data to the data to the data Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, Y = (0.14,0.18,0.22,0.25,0.29,0.32,0.35,0.39, 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), 0.37,0.58,0.73,0.96,1.34,2.10,4.39), where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The where U(I) = I, V(I) = 16 - I, and W(I) = MIN(U(I),V(I)).  The I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by I-th component of FVEC is thus defined by Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). Y(I) - (X(1) + U(I)/(V(I)*X(2) + W(I)*X(3))). PROGRAM TEST PROGRAM TEST PROGRAM TEST C C C C     Driver for SNLS1E example. C     Driver for SNLS1E example. C     Driver for SNLS1E example. C C C INTEGER I,IOPT,M,N,NPRINT,JNFO,LWA,NWRITE INTEGER I,IOPT,M,N,NPRINT,JNFO,LWA,NWRITE INTEGER I,IOPT,M,N,NPRINT,JNFO,LWA,NWRITE INTEGER IW(3) INTEGER IW(3) INTEGER IW(3) REAL TOL,FNORM REAL TOL,FNORM REAL TOL,FNORM REAL X(3),FVEC(15),WA(75) REAL X(3),FVEC(15),WA(75) REAL X(3),FVEC(15),WA(75) REAL ENORM,R1MACH REAL ENORM,R1MACH REAL ENORM,R1MACH EXTERNAL FCN EXTERNAL FCN EXTERNAL FCN DATA NWRITE /6/ DATA NWRITE /6/ DATA NWRITE /6/ C C C 1.E0 1.E0 1.E0 C 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 6. `FVEC`

input `array` argument; Fortran declaration `REAL`, Rust ABI type `*mut f32`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). are available for printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below. IFLAG will never be zero unless NPRINT is positive. must not be changed. RETURN contains the functions evaluated at the output X. is not positive, no .LE. (1+TOL)*ENORM(FVECS), where FVECS denotes the functions evaluated at XSOL.  If this (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN END Results obtained with different compilers or machines may be slightly different. FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS  0.9063596E-01 EXIT PARAMETER                         1 FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 0.8241058E-01  0.1133037E+01  0.2343695E+01 (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN C C     Below, calculate the full Jacobian. C 20    CONTINUE C DO 30 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 FJAC(I,1) = -1.E0 FJAC(I,2) = TMP1*TMP2/TMP4 FJAC(I,3) = TMP1*TMP3/TMP4 30    CONTINUE RETURN END (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN C C     Below, calculate the LDFJAC-th row of the Jacobian. C 20 CONTINUE I = LDFJAC TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 FJAC(1) = -1.E0 FJAC(2) = TMP1*TMP2/TMP4 FJAC(3) = TMP1*TMP3/TMP4 RETURN END are available for printing.  See the explanation of NPRINT below. IFLAG will never be zero unless NPRINT is positive. must not be changed. RETURN contains the functions evaluated at the output X. is not positive, no .LE. (1+TOL)*ENORM(FVECS), where FVECS denotes the functions evaluated at XSOL.  If this (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN END Results obtained with different compilers or machines may be slightly different. FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS  0.9063596E-01 EXIT PARAMETER                         1 FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION 0.8241058E-01  0.1133037E+01  0.2343695E+01 (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN C C     Below, calculate the full Jacobian. C 20    CONTINUE C DO 30 I = 1, M TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 FJAC(I,1) = -1.E0 FJAC(I,2) = TMP1*TMP2/TMP4 FJAC(I,3) = TMP1*TMP3/TMP4 30    CONTINUE RETURN END (X(1) + TMP1/(X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)) 10    CONTINUE RETURN C C     Below, calculate the LDFJAC-th row of the Jacobian. C 20 CONTINUE I = LDFJAC TMP1 = I TMP2 = 16 - I TMP3 = TMP1 IF (I .GT. 8) TMP3 = TMP2 TMP4 = (X(2)*TMP2 + X(3)*TMP3)**2 FJAC(1) = -1.E0 FJAC(2) = TMP1*TMP2/TMP4 FJAC(3) = TMP1*TMP3/TMP4 RETURN END not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 7. `TOL`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `REAL`, Rust ABI type `*mut f32`, and scalar. negative input variable.  Termination occurs when the algorithm estimates either that the relative error in the sum of squares is at most TOL or that the relative error between X and the solution is at most TOL.  Section 4 contains more details about TOL. K), then the final residual norm ENORM(FVEC) has K significant decimal digits and K), then the larger components of D*X have K significant decimal digits and SQRT(R1MACH(4)) C CALL SNLS1E(FCN,IOPT,M,N,X,FVEC,TOL,NPRINT, negative input variable.  Termination occurs when the algorithm estimates either that the relative error in the sum of squares is at most TOL or that the relative error between X and the solution is at most TOL.  Section 4 contains more details about TOL. K), then the final residual norm ENORM(FVEC) has K significant decimal digits and K), then the larger components of D*X have K significant decimal digits and SQRT(R1MACH(4)) C CALL SNLS1E(FCN,IOPT,M,N,X,FVEC,TOL,NPRINT, not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 8. `NPRINT`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is an integer input variable that enables controlled printing of iterates if it is positive.  In this case, FCN is called with IFLAG = 0 at the beginning of the first iteration and every NPRINT iterations thereafter and immediately prior to return, with X and FVEC available for printing. Appropriate print statements must be added to FCN (see example) and is not positive, no 0 C C     Set TOL to the square root of the machine precision. C     Unless high precision solutions are required, C     this is the recommended setting. C is an integer input variable that enables controlled printing of iterates if it is positive.  In this case, FCN is called with IFLAG = 0 at the beginning of the first iteration and every NPRINT iterations thereafter and immediately prior to return, with X and FVEC available for printing. Appropriate print statements must be added to FCN (see example) and is not positive, no 0 C C     Set TOL to the square root of the machine precision. C     Unless high precision solutions are required, C     this is the recommended setting. C not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 9. `INFO`

status-output `status` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is an integer output variable.  If the user has terminated execution, INFO is set to the (negative) value of IFLAG.  See is set as follows. 0  improper input parameters. 1  algorithm estimates that the relative error in the sum of squares is at most TOL. 2  algorithm estimates that the relative error between 3  conditions for INFO = 1 and INFO = 2 both hold. 4  FVEC is orthogonal to the columns of the Jacobian to machine precision. 5  number of calls to FCN has reached 100*(N+1) 6  TOL is too small.  No further reduction in the sum of squares is possible. 7  TOL is too small.  No further improvement in the approximate solution X is possible. Sections 4 and 5 contain more details about INFO. fied). Second Convergence Test.  If D is a diagonal matrix (implicitly generated by SNLS1E) whose entries contain scale factors for the variables, then this test attempts to guarantee that fied).  There is a danger that the smaller components of D*X may have large relative errors, but the choice of D is such that the accuracy of the components of X is usually related to their sensitivity. Third Convergence Test.  This test is satisfied when FVEC is orthogonal to the columns of the Jacobian to machine preci- sion.  There is no clear relationship between this test and the accuracy of SNLS1E, and furthermore, the test is equally well satisfied at other critical points, namely maximizers and saddle points.  Therefore, termination caused by this test 4) should be examined carefully. 5. Unsuccessful Completion. Unsuccessful termination of SNLS1E can be due to improper input parameters, arithmetic interrupts, or an excessive number of function evaluations. Improper Input Parameters.  INFO is set to 0 if IOPT .LT. 1 or IOPT .GT. 3, or N .LE. 0, or M .LT. N, or TOL .LT. 0.E0, FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) is an integer output variable.  If the user has terminated execution, INFO is set to the (negative) value of IFLAG.  See is set as follows. 0  improper input parameters. 1  algorithm estimates that the relative error in the sum of squares is at most TOL. 2  algorithm estimates that the relative error between 3  conditions for INFO = 1 and INFO = 2 both hold. 4  FVEC is orthogonal to the columns of the Jacobian to machine precision. 5  number of calls to FCN has reached 100*(N+1) 6  TOL is too small.  No further reduction in the sum of squares is possible. 7  TOL is too small.  No further improvement in the approximate solution X is possible. Sections 4 and 5 contain more details about INFO. fied). Second Convergence Test.  If D is a diagonal matrix (implicitly generated by SNLS1E) whose entries contain scale factors for the variables, then this test attempts to guarantee that fied).  There is a danger that the smaller components of D*X may have large relative errors, but the choice of D is such that the accuracy of the components of X is usually related to their sensitivity. Third Convergence Test.  This test is satisfied when FVEC is orthogonal to the columns of the Jacobian to machine preci- sion.  There is no clear relationship between this test and the accuracy of SNLS1E, and furthermore, the test is equally well satisfied at other critical points, namely maximizers and saddle points.  Therefore, termination caused by this test 4) should be examined carefully. 5. Unsuccessful Completion. Unsuccessful termination of SNLS1E can be due to improper input parameters, arithmetic interrupts, or an excessive number of function evaluations. Improper Input Parameters.  INFO is set to 0 if IOPT .LT. 1 or IOPT .GT. 3, or N .LE. 0, or M .LT. N, or TOL .LT. 0.E0, FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) 1,N) STOP 1000 FORMAT (5X,' FINAL L2 NORM OF THE RESIDUALS',E15.7 // 5X,' EXIT PARAMETER',16X,I10 // 5X,' FINAL APPROXIMATE SOLUTION' // 5X,3E15.7) END SUBROUTINE FCN(IFLAG,M,N,X,FVEC,DUM,IDUM) not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

## 10. `IW`

input `array` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). is an INTEGER work array of length N. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) is an INTEGER work array of length N. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not applicable or not stated by selected source

## 11. `WA`

input `array` argument; Fortran declaration `REAL`, Rust ABI type `*mut f32`, and rank 1; dimensions (*). is a work array of length LWA. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) is a work array of length LWA. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not applicable or not stated by selected source

## 12. `LWA`

input `scalar` argument; Fortran declaration `INTEGER`, Rust ABI type `*mut crate::FortranInteger`, and scalar. is a positive integer input variable not less than .LT. N*(N+5)+M. Arithmetic Interrupts.  If these interrupts occur in the FCN subroutine during an early stage of the computation, they may be caused by an unacceptable choice of X by SNLS1E.  In this case, it may be possible to remedy the situation by not evalu- ating the functions here, but instead setting the components of FVEC to numbers that exceed those in the initial FVEC. Excessive Number of Function Evaluations.  If the number of 75 FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) is a positive integer input variable not less than .LT. N*(N+5)+M. Arithmetic Interrupts.  If these interrupts occur in the FCN subroutine during an early stage of the computation, they may be caused by an unacceptable choice of X by SNLS1E.  In this case, it may be possible to remedy the situation by not evalu- ating the functions here, but instead setting the components of FVEC to numbers that exceed those in the initial FVEC. Excessive Number of Function Evaluations.  If the number of 75 FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC) not applicable or not stated by selected source not a workspace argument

# Return value

This is a Fortran subroutine and has no direct return value. Its results, status, and any persistent solver state are communicated through the documented arguments.

# Callback contract

Callback arguments use the reviewed ABI shown by their Rust function-pointer type. They are invoked synchronously by the native call, must remain valid until it returns, must uphold every documented input/output extent, and **must not unwind** through Fortran. A callback must not retain or free caller-owned native buffers unless the source contract expressly permits it.

# Status and error values

The selected source has no separate status-code section. Status output arguments, if present, are identified in the argument contract; legacy SLATEC error-runtime behavior remains part of the native provider contract.

# Workspace and array requirements

- `FCN`: not a workspace argument
- `IOPT`: not a workspace argument
- `M`: not a workspace argument
- `N`: not a workspace argument
- `X`: not a workspace argument
- `FVEC`: not a workspace argument
- `TOL`: not a workspace argument
- `NPRINT`: not a workspace argument
- `INFO`: not a workspace argument
- `IW`: is an INTEGER work array of length N. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC)
- `WA`: is a work array of length LWA. FNORM = ENORM(M,FVEC)
- `LWA`: not a workspace argument

# ABI notes

- Canonical Rust path: `slatec_sys::least_squares::snls1e`
- Original SLATEC routine: `SNLS1E`
- Native symbol: `snls1e_`
- ABI fingerprint: `unavailable`
- Exact Netlib source file: [SNLS1E](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/src/snls1e.f)

# Safety

Every raw pointer must be non-null unless this argument contract expressly permits null, correctly aligned, and valid for its documented readable or writable extent. Preserve Fortran column-major layout, length, leading-dimension, workspace, callback-lifetime, aliasing, and provider-runtime requirements. The native routine does not retain ordinary argument pointers beyond this call.
