# BVSUP

[Back to family index](../routines-by-family.md) · [Alphabetical index](../routines-alphabetical.md) · [Coverage](../routine-coverage.md)

## Purpose

Solve a linear two-point boundary value problem using superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme.

## Description

********************************************************************** Subroutine BVSUP solves a LINEAR two-point boundary-value problem of the form dY/dX = MATRIX(X,U)*Y(X) + G(X,U) A*Y(Xinitial) = ALPHA , B*Y(Xfinal) = BETA Coupled with the solution of the initial value problem dU/dX = F(X,U) U(Xinitial) = ETA ********************************************************************** Abstract The method of solution uses superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme. Each time the superposition solutions start to lose their numerical linear independence, the vectors are reorthonormalized before integration proceeds. The underlying principle of the algorithm is then to piece together the intermediate (orthogonalized) solutions, defined on the various subintervals, to obtain the desired solutions. ********************************************************************** INPUT to BVSUP ********************************************************************** NROWY = Actual row dimension of Y in calling program. NROWY must be .GE. NCOMP NCOMP = Number of components per solution vector. NCOMP is equal to number of original differential equations. NCOMP = NIC + NFC. XPTS = Desired output points for solution. They must be monotonic. Xinitial = XPTS(1) Xfinal = XPTS(NXPTS) NXPTS = Number of output points A(NROWA,NCOMP) = Boundary condition matrix at Xinitial, must be contained in (NIC,NCOMP) sub-matrix. NROWA = Actual row dimension of A in calling program, NROWA must be .GE. NIC. ALPHA(NIC+NEQIVP) = Boundary conditions at Xinitial. If NEQIVP .GT. 0 (see below), the boundary conditions at Xinitial for the initial value equations must be stored starting in position (NIC + 1) of ALPHA. Thus, ALPHA(NIC+K) = ETA(K). NIC = Number of boundary conditions at Xinitial. B(NROWB,NCOMP) = Boundary condition matrix at Xfinal, must be contained in (NFC,NCOMP) sub-matrix. NROWB = Actual row dimension of B in calling program, NROWB must be .GE. NFC. BETA(NFC) = Boundary conditions at Xfinal. NFC = Number of boundary conditions at Xfinal IGOFX =0 -- The inhomogeneous term G(X) is identically zero. =1 -- The inhomogeneous term G(X) is not identically zero. (if IGOFX=1, then subroutine GVEC (or UVEC) must be supplied). RE = Relative error tolerance used by the integrator (see one of the integrators) AE = Absolute error tolerance used by the integrator (see one of the integrators) **NOTE- RE and AE should not both be zero. IFLAG = A status parameter used principally for output. However, for efficient solution of problems which are originally defined as complex valued (but converted to real systems to use this code), the user must set IFLAG=13 on input. See the comment below for more information on solving such problems. WORK(NDW) = Floating point array used for internal storage. NDW = Actual dimension of WORK array allocated by user. An estimate for NDW can be computed from the following NDW = 130 + NCOMP**2 * (6 + NXPTS/2 + expected number of orthonormalizations/8) For the DISK or TAPE storage mode, NDW = 6 * NCOMP**2 + 10 * NCOMP + 130 However, when the ADAMS integrator is to be used, the estimates are NDW = 130 + NCOMP**2 * (13 + NXPTS/2 + expected number of orthonormalizations/8) and NDW = 13 * NCOMP**2 + 22 * NCOMP + 130 , respectively. IWORK(NDIW) = Integer array used for internal storage. NDIW = Actual dimension of IWORK array allocated by user. An estimate for NDIW can be computed from the following NDIW = 68 + NCOMP * (1 + expected number of orthonormalizations) **NOTE -- The amount of storage required is problem dependent and may be difficult to predict in advance. Experience has shown that for most problems 20 or fewer orthonormalizations should suffice. If the problem cannot be completed with the allotted storage, then a message will be printed which estimates the amount of storage necessary. In any case, the user can examine the IWORK array for the actual storage requirements, as described in the output information below. NEQIVP = Number of auxiliary initial value equations being added to the boundary value problem. **NOTE -- Occasionally the coefficients MATRIX and/or G may be functions which depend on the independent variable X and on U, the solution of an auxiliary initial value problem. In order to avoid the difficulties associated with interpolation, the auxiliary equations may be solved simultaneously with the given boundary value problem. This initial value problem may be LINEAR or NONLINEAR. See SAND77-1328 for an example. The user must supply subroutines FMAT, GVEC, UIVP and UVEC, when needed (they MUST be so named), to evaluate the derivatives as follows A. FMAT must be supplied. SUBROUTINE FMAT(X,Y,YP) X = Independent variable (input to FMAT) Y = Dependent variable vector (input to FMAT) YP = dY/dX = Derivative vector (output from FMAT) Compute the derivatives for the HOMOGENEOUS problem YP(I) = dY(I)/dX = MATRIX(X) * Y(I) , I = 1,...,NCOMP When (NEQIVP .GT. 0) and MATRIX is dependent on U as well as on X, the following common statement must be included in FMAT COMMON /MLIVP/ NOFST For convenience, the U vector is stored at the bottom of the Y array. Thus, during any call to FMAT, U(I) is referenced by Y(NOFST + I). Subroutine BVDER calls FMAT NFC times to evaluate the homogeneous equations and, if necessary, it calls FMAT once in evaluating the particular solution. Since X remains unchanged in this sequence of calls it is possible to realize considerable computational savings for complicated and expensive evaluations of the MATRIX entries. To do this the user merely passes a variable, say XS, via COMMON where XS is defined in the main program to be any value except the initial X. Then the non-constant elements of MATRIX(X) appearing in the differential equations need only be computed if X is unequal to XS, whereupon XS is reset to X. B. If NEQIVP .GT. 0 , UIVP must also be supplied. SUBROUTINE UIVP(X,U,UP) X = Independent variable (input to UIVP) U = Dependent variable vector (input to UIVP) UP = dU/dX = Derivative vector (output from UIVP) Compute the derivatives for the auxiliary initial value eqs UP(I) = dU(I)/dX, I = 1,...,NEQIVP. Subroutine BVDER calls UIVP once to evaluate the derivatives for the auxiliary initial value equations. C. If NEQIVP = 0 and IGOFX = 1 , GVEC must be supplied. SUBROUTINE GVEC(X,G) X = Independent variable (input to GVEC) G = Vector of inhomogeneous terms G(X) (output from GVEC) Compute the inhomogeneous terms G(X) G(I) = G(X) values for I = 1,...,NCOMP. Subroutine BVDER calls GVEC in evaluating the particular solution provided G(X) is NOT identically zero. Thus, when IGOFX=0, the user need NOT write a GVEC subroutine. Also, the user does not have to bother with the computational savings scheme for GVEC as this is automatically achieved via the BVDER subroutine. D. If NEQIVP .GT. 0 and IGOFX = 1 , UVEC must be supplied. SUBROUTINE UVEC(X,U,G) X = Independent variable (input to UVEC) U = Dependent variable vector from the auxiliary initial value problem (input to UVEC) G = Array of inhomogeneous terms G(X,U)(output from UVEC) Compute the inhomogeneous terms G(X,U) G(I) = G(X,U) values for I = 1,...,NCOMP. Subroutine BVDER calls UVEC in evaluating the particular solution provided G(X,U) is NOT identically zero. Thus, when IGOFX=0, the user need NOT write a UVEC subroutine. The following is optional input to BVSUP to give the user more flexibility in use of the code. See SAND75-0198 , SAND77-1328 , SAND77-1690,SAND78-0522, and SAND78-1501 for more information. ****CAUTION -- The user MUST zero out IWORK(1),...,IWORK(15) prior to calling BVSUP. These locations define optional input and MUST be zero UNLESS set to special values by the user as described below. IWORK(1) -- Number of orthonormalization points. A value need be set only if IWORK(11) = 1 IWORK(9) -- Integrator and orthonormalization parameter (default value is 1) 1 = RUNGE-KUTTA-FEHLBERG code using GRAM-SCHMIDT test. 2 = ADAMS code using GRAM-SCHMIDT TEST. IWORK(11) -- Orthonormalization points parameter (default value is 0) 0 - Orthonormalization points not pre-assigned. 1 - Orthonormalization points pre-assigned in the first IWORK(1) positions of WORK. IWORK(12) -- Storage parameter (default value is 0) 0 - All storage IN CORE LUN - Homogeneous and inhomogeneous solutions at output points and orthonormalization information are stored on DISK. The logical unit number to be used for DISK I/O (NTAPE) is set to IWORK(12). WORK(1),... -- Pre-assigned orthonormalization points, stored monotonically, corresponding to the direction of integration. ****************************** *** COMPLEX VALUED PROBLEM *** ****************************** **NOTE*** Suppose the original boundary value problem is NC equations of the form dW/dX = MAT(X,U)*W(X) + H(X,U) R*W(Xinitial)=GAMMA , S*W(Xfinal)=DELTA where all variables are complex valued. The BVSUP code can be used by converting to a real system of size 2*NC. To solve the larger dimensioned problem efficiently, the user must initialize IFLAG=13 on input and order the vector components according to Y(1)=real(W(1)),...,Y(NC)=real(W(NC)),Y(NC+1)=imag(W(1)),...., Y(2*NC)=imag(W(NC)). Then define ........................... . real(MAT) -imag(MAT) . MATRIX = . . . imag(MAT) real(MAT) . ........................... The matrices A,B and vectors G,ALPHA,BETA must be defined similarly. Further details can be found in SAND78-1501. ********************************************************************** OUTPUT from BVSUP ********************************************************************** Y(NROWY,NXPTS) = Solution at specified output points. IFLAG output values =-5 Algorithm ,for obtaining starting vectors for the special complex problem structure, was unable to obtain the initial vectors satisfying the necessary independence criteria. =-4 Rank of boundary condition matrix A is less than NIC, as determined by LSSUDS. =-2 Invalid input parameters. =-1 Insufficient number of storage locations allocated for WORK or IWORK. =0 Indicates successful solution =1 A computed solution is returned but UNIQUENESS of the solution of the boundary-value problem is questionable. For an eigenvalue problem, this should be treated as a successful execution since this is the expected mode of return. =2 A computed solution is returned but the EXISTENCE of the solution to the boundary-value problem is questionable. =3 A nontrivial solution approximation is returned although the boundary condition matrix B*Y(Xfinal) is found to be nonsingular (to the desired accuracy level) while the right hand side vector is zero. To eliminate this type of return, the accuracy of the eigenvalue parameter must be improved. ***NOTE- We attempt to diagnose the correct problem behavior and report possible difficulties by the appropriate error flag. However, the user should probably resolve the problem using smaller error tolerances and/or perturbations in the boundary conditions or other parameters. This will often reveal the correct interpretation for the problem posed. =13 Maximum number of orthonormalizations attained before reaching Xfinal. =20-flag from integrator (DERKF or DEABM) values can range from 21 to 25. =30 Solution vectors form a dependent set. WORK(1),...,WORK(IWORK(1)) = Orthonormalization points determined by BVPOR. IWORK(1) = Number of orthonormalizations performed by BVPOR. IWORK(2) = Maximum number of orthonormalizations allowed as calculated from storage allocated by user. IWORK(3),IWORK(4),IWORK(5),IWORK(6) Give information about actual storage requirements for WORK and IWORK arrays. In particular, required storage for WORK array is IWORK(3) + IWORK(4)*(expected number of orthonormalizations) required storage for IWORK array is IWORK(5) + IWORK(6)*(expected number of orthonormalizations) IWORK(8) = Final value of exponent parameter used in tolerance test for orthonormalization. IWORK(16) = Number of independent vectors returned from MGSBV. It is only of interest when IFLAG=30 is obtained. IWORK(17) = Numerically estimated rank of the boundary condition matrix defined from B*Y(Xfinal) ********************************************************************** Necessary machine constants are defined in the function routine R1MACH. The user must make sure that the values set in R1MACH are relevant to the computer being used. **********************************************************************

## Classification

- Historical role: `user_callable`
- Program-unit kind: `subroutine`
- Identity kind: `subroutine`
- Identity status: `retained_verified_program_unit`
- Precision: `unknown`
- Scalar kind: `unknown`
- Primary family: `ODE solvers`
- Mathematical domain: `ode-dae`
- Package provenance: `unknown`
- GAMS classifications: `I1B1`
- Family evidence: `netlib_gams` (`high`)

## Project coverage

- Source status: `canonical_verified`
- Raw-binding status: `bound`
- Build/profile status: `selected_by_profile`
- Audit status: `family_inventory_only`
- Safe-API status: `none`
- Implementation status: `not_exposed_as_safe_api`
- Deferment status: Catalogue inclusion does not imply a Rust binding or safe API.

## Providers

- Canonical provider: `main-src/src/bvsup.f` (`pinned-reproducible-subset`)
- Alternate providers:
  - `src/bvsup.f` (`live-main-source`)

## Official references

- [Netlib source](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/src/bvsup.f) — `verified_cached`
- [Netlib full source](https://www.netlib.org/cgi-bin/netlibfiles.pl?filename=/slatec/src/bvsup.f) — `verified_cached`
- [Netlib directory entry](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/src/) — `verified_cached`
- [Netlib TOC](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/toc) — `verified_cached`

## Evidence notes

Description selected from `canonical_source_prologue` using `PURPOSE`; confidence: `high`. External-reference statuses are generated offline from separately cached source files, directory indexes, and TOC evidence.

<!-- raw-api-status:start -->
## Raw Rust API status

This generated status is evidence only; see the [authoritative inventory](../../../generated/raw-api/routine-status.json).

- Generated raw declaration: `generated_abi_validated`
- Reviewed family declaration: `not_reviewed_by_raw_api_registry`
- Canonical Rust path: `not_promoted`
- Current legacy Rust paths: `none`
- Public declaration feature: `raw-ffi-numeric-array-subroutines`
- `all`-feature reachability: `not_enabled_by_all`
- Provider-backed callable symbol: `yes` (`observed_exactly_once`)
- Documentation status: `not_documented`
- Compile-test status: `compiler_observed`
- Link-test status: `passed`
- Runtime-test status: `passed`
- Safe-wrapper status: `not_safely_wrapped`
- Exclusion or deferment reason: `source object has unresolved external procedure dependencies: fmat_, gvec_, uivp_, uvec_`
<!-- raw-api-status:end -->
