# DBVSUP

[Family: ODE solvers](../families/ode-solvers.md) | [All families](../routines-by-family.md) | [Alphabetical index](../routines-alphabetical.md) | [Coverage](../routine-coverage.md)

## Purpose

Solve a linear two-point boundary value problem using superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme.

## Description

********************************************************************** Subroutine DBVSUP solves a linear two-point boundary-value problem of the form DY/DX = MATRIX(X,U)*Y(X) + G(X,U) A*Y(XINITIAL) = ALPHA , B*Y(XFINAL) = BETA coupled with the solution of the initial value problem DU/DX = F(X,U) U(XINITIAL) = ETA ********************************************************************** The method of solution uses superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme. Each time the superposition solutions start to lose their numerical linear independence, the vectors are reorthonormalized before integration proceeds. The underlying principle of the algorithm is then to piece together the intermediate (orthogonalized) solutions, defined on the various subintervals, to obtain the desired solutions. ********************************************************************** INPUT to DBVSUP ********************************************************************** NROWY = actual row dimension of Y in calling program. NROWY must be .GE. NCOMP NCOMP = number of components per solution vector. NCOMP is equal to number of original differential equations. NCOMP = NIC + NFC. XPTS = desired output points for solution. They must be monotonic. XINITIAL = XPTS(1) XFINAL = XPTS(NXPTS) NXPTS = number of output points. A(NROWA,NCOMP) = boundary condition matrix at XINITIAL must be contained in (NIC,NCOMP) sub-matrix. NROWA = actual row dimension of A in calling program, NROWA must be .GE. NIC. ALPHA(NIC+NEQIVP) = boundary conditions at XINITIAL. If NEQIVP .GT. 0 (see below), the boundary conditions at XINITIAL for the initial value equations must be stored starting in position (NIC + 1) of ALPHA. Thus, ALPHA(NIC+K) = ETA(K). NIC = number of boundary conditions at XINITIAL. B(NROWB,NCOMP) = boundary condition matrix at XFINAL. Must be contained in (NFC,NCOMP) sub-matrix. NROWB = actual row dimension of B in calling program, NROWB must be .GE. NFC. BETA(NFC) = boundary conditions at XFINAL. NFC = number of boundary conditions at XFINAL. IGOFX =0 -- The inhomogeneous term G(X) is identically zero. =1 -- The inhomogeneous term G(X) is not identically zero. (if IGOFX=1, then Subroutine DGVEC (or DUVEC) must be supplied). RE = relative error tolerance used by the integrator. (see one of the integrators) AE = absolute error tolerance used by the integrator. (see one of the integrators) **NOTE- RE and AE should not both be zero. IFLAG = a status parameter used principally for output. However, for efficient solution of problems which are originally defined as COMPLEX*16 valued (but converted to double precision systems to use this code), the user must set IFLAG=13 on input. See the comment below for more information on solving such problems. WORK(NDW) = floating point array used for internal storage. NDW = actual dimension of work array allocated by user. An estimate for NDW can be computed from the following NDW = 130 + NCOMP**2 * (6 + NXPTS/2 + expected number of orthonormalizations/8) For the disk or tape storage mode, NDW = 6 * NCOMP**2 + 10 * NCOMP + 130 However, when the ADAMS integrator is to be used, the estimates are NDW = 130 + NCOMP**2 * (13 + NXPTS/2 + expected number of orthonormalizations/8) and NDW = 13 * NCOMP**2 + 22 * NCOMP + 130 , respectively. IWORK(NDIW) = integer array used for internal storage. NDIW = actual dimension of IWORK array allocated by user. An estimate for NDIW can be computed from the following NDIW = 68 + NCOMP * (1 + expected number of orthonormalizations) **NOTE -- the amount of storage required is problem dependent and may be difficult to predict in advance. Experience has shown that for most problems 20 or fewer orthonormalizations should suffice. If the problem cannot be completed with the allotted storage, then a message will be printed which estimates the amount of storage necessary. In any case, the user can examine the IWORK array for the actual storage requirements, as described in the output information below. NEQIVP = number of auxiliary initial value equations being added to the boundary value problem. **NOTE -- Occasionally the coefficients matrix and/or G may be functions which depend on the independent variable X and on U, the solution of an auxiliary initial value problem. In order to avoid the difficulties associated with interpolation, the auxiliary equations may be solved simultaneously with the given boundary value problem. This initial value problem may be linear or nonlinear. See SAND77-1328 for an example. The user must supply subroutines DFMAT, DGVEC, DUIVP and DUVEC, when needed (they must be so named), to evaluate the derivatives as follows A. DFMAT must be supplied. SUBROUTINE DFMAT(X,Y,YP) X = independent variable (input to DFMAT) Y = dependent variable vector (input to DFMAT) YP = DY/DX = derivative vector (output from DFMAT) Compute the derivatives for the homogeneous problem YP(I) = DY(I)/DX = MATRIX(X) * Y(I) , I = 1,...,NCOMP When (NEQIVP .GT. 0) and matrix is dependent on U as well as on X, the following common statement must be included in DFMAT COMMON /DMLIVP/ NOFST for convenience, the U vector is stored at the bottom of the Y array. Thus, during any call to DFMAT, U(I) is referenced by Y(NOFST + I). Subroutine DBVDER calls DFMAT NFC times to evaluate the homogeneous equations and, if necessary, it calls DFMAT once in evaluating the particular solution. since X remains unchanged in this sequence of calls it is possible to realize considerable computational savings for complicated and expensive evaluations of the matrix entries. To do this the user merely passes a variable, say XS, via common where XS is defined in the main program to be any value except the initial X. Then the non-constant elements of matrix(x) appearing in the differential equations need only be computed if X is unequal to XS, whereupon XS is reset to X. B. If NEQIVP .GT. 0 , DUIVP must also be supplied. SUBROUTINE DUIVP(X,U,UP) X = independent variable (input to DUIVP) U = dependent variable vector (input to DUIVP) UP = DU/DX = derivative vector (output from DUIVP) Compute the derivatives for the auxiliary initial value eqs UP(I) = DU(I)/DX, I = 1,...,NEQIVP. Subroutine DBVDER calls DUIVP once to evaluate the derivatives for the auxiliary initial value equations. C. If NEQIVP = 0 and IGOFX = 1 , DGVEC must be supplied. SUBROUTINE DGVEC(X,G) X = independent variable (input to DGVEC) G = vector of inhomogeneous terms G(X) (output from DGVEC) Compute the inhomogeneous terms G(X) G(I) = G(X) values for I = 1,...,NCOMP. Subroutine DBVDER calls DGVEC in evaluating the particular solution provided G(X) is not identically zero. Thus, when IGOFX=0, the user need not write a DGVEC subroutine. Also, the user does not have to bother with the computational savings scheme for DGVEC as this is automatically achieved via the DBVDER subroutine. D. If NEQIVP .GT. 0 and IGOFX = 1 , DUVEC must be supplied. SUBROUTINE DUVEC(X,U,G) X = independent variable (input to DUVEC) U = dependent variable vector from the auxiliary initial value problem (input to DUVEC) G = array of inhomogeneous terms G(X,U)(output from DUVEC) Compute the inhomogeneous terms G(X,U) G(I) = G(X,U) values for I = 1,...,NCOMP. Subroutine DBVDER calls DUVEC in evaluating the particular solution provided G(X,U) is not identically zero. Thus, when IGOFX=0, the user need not write a DUVEC subroutine. The following is optional input to DBVSUP to give user more flexibility in use of code. See SAND75-0198, SAND77-1328, SAND77-1690, SAND78-0522, and SAND78-1501 for more information. ****CAUTION -- The user must zero out IWORK(1),...,IWORK(15) prior to calling DBVSUP. These locations define optional input and must be zero unless set to special values by the user as described below. IWORK(1) -- number of orthonormalization points. A value need be set only if IWORK(11) = 1 IWORK(9) -- integrator and orthonormalization parameter (default value is 1) 1 = RUNGE-KUTTA-FEHLBERG code using GRAM-SCHMIDT test. 2 = ADAMS code using GRAM-SCHMIDT test. IWORK(11) -- orthonormalization points parameter (default value is 0) 0 - orthonormalization points not pre-assigned. 1 - orthonormalization points pre-assigned in the first IWORK(1) positions of work. IWORK(12) -- storage parameter (default value is 0) 0 - all storage in core. LUN - homogeneous and inhomogeneous solutions at output points and orthonormalization information are stored on disk. The logical unit number to be used for disk I/O (NTAPE) is set to IWORK(12). WORK(1),... -- pre-assigned orthonormalization points, stored monotonically, corresponding to the direction of integration. ****************************************************** *** COMPLEX*16 VALUED PROBLEM *** ****************************************************** **NOTE*** Suppose the original boundary value problem is NC equations of the form DW/DX = MAT(X,U)*W(X) + H(X,U) R*W(XINITIAL)=GAMMA , S*W(XFINAL)=DELTA where all variables are COMPLEX*16 valued. The DBVSUP code can be used by converting to a double precision system of size 2*NC. To solve the larger dimensioned problem efficiently, the user must initialize IFLAG=13 on input and order the vector components according to Y(1)=DOUBLE PRECISION(W(1)),...,Y(NC)=DOUBLE PRECISION(W(NC)),Y(NC+1)=IMAG(W(1)),...., Y(2*NC)=IMAG(W(NC)). Then define ............................................... . DOUBLE PRECISION(MAT) -IMAG(MAT) . MATRIX = . . . IMAG(MAT) DOUBLE PRECISION(MAT) . ............................................... The matrices A,B and vectors G,ALPHA,BETA must be defined similarly. Further details can be found in SAND78-1501. ********************************************************************** OUTPUT from DBVSUP ********************************************************************** Y(NROWY,NXPTS) = solution at specified output points. IFLAG Output Values =-5 algorithm ,for obtaining starting vectors for the special COMPLEX*16 problem structure, was unable to obtain the initial vectors satisfying the necessary independence criteria. =-4 rank of boundary condition matrix A is less than NIC, as determined by DLSSUD. =-2 invalid input parameters. =-1 insufficient number of storage locations allocated for WORK or IWORK. =0 indicates successful solution. =1 a computed solution is returned but uniqueness of the solution of the boundary-value problem is questionable. For an eigenvalue problem, this should be treated as a successful execution since this is the expected mode of return. =2 a computed solution is returned but the existence of the solution to the boundary-value problem is questionable. =3 a nontrivial solution approximation is returned although the boundary condition matrix B*Y(XFINAL) is found to be nonsingular (to the desired accuracy level) while the right hand side vector is zero. To eliminate this type of return, the accuracy of the eigenvalue parameter must be improved. ***NOTE-We attempt to diagnose the correct problem behavior and report possible difficulties by the appropriate error flag. However, the user should probably resolve the problem using smaller error tolerances and/or perturbations in the boundary conditions or other parameters. This will often reveal the correct interpretation for the problem posed. =13 maximum number of orthonormalizations attained before reaching XFINAL. =20-flag from integrator (DDERKF or DDEABM) values can range from 21 to 25. =30 solution vectors form a dependent set. WORK(1),...,WORK(IWORK(1)) = orthonormalization points determined by DBVPOR. IWORK(1) = number of orthonormalizations performed by DBVPOR. IWORK(2) = maximum number of orthonormalizations allowed as calculated from storage allocated by user. IWORK(3),IWORK(4),IWORK(5),IWORK(6) give information about actual storage requirements for WORK and IWORK arrays. In particular, required storage for work array is IWORK(3) + IWORK(4)*(expected number of orthonormalizations) required storage for IWORK array is IWORK(5) + IWORK(6)*(expected number of orthonormalizations) IWORK(8) = final value of exponent parameter used in tolerance test for orthonormalization. IWORK(16) = number of independent vectors returned from DMGSBV. It is only of interest when IFLAG=30 is obtained. IWORK(17) = numerically estimated rank of the boundary condition matrix defined from B*Y(XFINAL) ********************************************************************** Necessary machine constants are defined in the Function Routine D1MACH. The user must make sure that the values set in D1MACH are relevant to the computer being used. ********************************************************************** **********************************************************************

## Classification

- Historical role: `user_callable`
- Program-unit kind: `subroutine`
- Identity kind: `subroutine`
- Identity status: `retained_verified_program_unit`
- Precision: `f64`
- Scalar kind: `real`
- Primary family: `ODE solvers`
- Mathematical domain: `ode-dae`
- Package provenance: `unknown`
- GAMS classifications: `I1B1`
- Family evidence: `netlib_gams` (`high`)

## Project coverage

- Source status: `canonical_verified`
- Raw-binding status: `bound`
- Build/profile status: `selected_by_profile`
- Audit status: `family_inventory_only`
- Safe-API status: `none`
- Implementation status: `not_exposed_as_safe_api`
- Deferment status: Catalogue inclusion does not imply a Rust binding or safe API.

## Providers

- Canonical provider: `main-src/src/dbvsup.f` (`pinned-reproducible-subset`)
- Alternate providers:
  - `src/dbvsup.f` (`live-main-source`)

## Official references

- [Netlib source](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/src/dbvsup.f) — `verified_cached`
- [Netlib full source](https://www.netlib.org/cgi-bin/netlibfiles.pl?filename=/slatec/src/dbvsup.f) — `verified_cached`
- [Netlib directory entry](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/src/) — `verified_cached`
- [Netlib TOC](https://www.netlib.org/slatec/toc) — `verified_cached`

## Evidence notes

Description selected from `canonical_source_prologue` using `PURPOSE`; confidence: `high`. External-reference statuses are generated offline from separately cached source files, directory indexes, and TOC evidence.

<!-- release-readiness:start -->
## Interface documentation quality

- Evidence level: `support_unit_minimal`
- Description provenance: `source_prologue`
- Assessment: the support identity records its role, side-effect boundary, and non-public disposition
- Dedicated family page: [ODE solvers](../families/ode-solvers.md)

### Arguments

| Argument | Direction | Fortran type | Rust raw type | Shape | Description | Relationships and requirements | Nullable |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `Y` | input | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | rank 2; dimensions (NROWY, *) | ********************************************************************** Subroutine DBVSUP solves a linear two-point boundary-value problem of the form DY/DX = MATRIX(X,U)*Y(X) + G(X,U) A*Y(XINITIAL) = ALPHA , B*Y(XFINAL) = BETA coupled with the solution of the initial value problem DU/DX = F(X,U) U(XINITIAL) = ETA ********************************************************************** The method of solution uses superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NROWY` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | ********************************************************************** INPUT to DBVSUP ********************************************************************** NROWY = actual row dimension of Y in calling program. | ********************************************************************** INPUT to DBVSUP ********************************************************************** NROWY = actual row dimension of Y in calling program. Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NCOMP` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | NCOMP NCOMP = number of components per solution vector. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `XPTS` | output | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | rank 1; dimensions (*) | XPTS = desired output points for solution. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NXPTS` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | XINITIAL = XPTS(1) XFINAL = XPTS(NXPTS) NXPTS = number of output points. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `A` | output | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | rank 2; dimensions (NROWA, *) | ********************************************************************** Subroutine DBVSUP solves a linear two-point boundary-value problem of the form DY/DX = MATRIX(X,U)*Y(X) + G(X,U) A*Y(XINITIAL) = ALPHA , B*Y(XFINAL) = BETA coupled with the solution of the initial value problem DU/DX = F(X,U) U(XINITIAL) = ETA ********************************************************************** The method of solution uses superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NROWA` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | A(NROWA,NCOMP) = boundary condition matrix at XINITIAL must be contained in (NIC,NCOMP) sub-matrix. | A(NROWA,NCOMP) = boundary condition matrix at XINITIAL must be contained in (NIC,NCOMP) sub-matrix. Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `ALPHA` | unavailable | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | rank 1; dimensions (*) | ********************************************************************** Subroutine DBVSUP solves a linear two-point boundary-value problem of the form DY/DX = MATRIX(X,U)*Y(X) + G(X,U) A*Y(XINITIAL) = ALPHA , B*Y(XFINAL) = BETA coupled with the solution of the initial value problem DU/DX = F(X,U) U(XINITIAL) = ETA ********************************************************************** The method of solution uses superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NIC` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | NCOMP = NIC + NFC. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `B` | unavailable | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | rank 2; dimensions (NROWB, *) | ********************************************************************** Subroutine DBVSUP solves a linear two-point boundary-value problem of the form DY/DX = MATRIX(X,U)*Y(X) + G(X,U) A*Y(XINITIAL) = ALPHA , B*Y(XFINAL) = BETA coupled with the solution of the initial value problem DU/DX = F(X,U) U(XINITIAL) = ETA ********************************************************************** The method of solution uses superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NROWB` | unavailable | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | B(NROWB,NCOMP) = boundary condition matrix at XFINAL. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `BETA` | unavailable | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | rank 1; dimensions (*) | ********************************************************************** Subroutine DBVSUP solves a linear two-point boundary-value problem of the form DY/DX = MATRIX(X,U)*Y(X) + G(X,U) A*Y(XINITIAL) = ALPHA , B*Y(XFINAL) = BETA coupled with the solution of the initial value problem DU/DX = F(X,U) U(XINITIAL) = ETA ********************************************************************** The method of solution uses superposition coupled with an orthonormalization procedure and a variable-step integration scheme. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NFC` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | NCOMP = NIC + NFC. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `IGOFX` | input | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | IGOFX =0 -- The inhomogeneous term G(X) is identically zero. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `RE` | output | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | scalar | RE = relative error tolerance used by the integrator. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `AE` | output | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | scalar | (see one of the integrators) AE = absolute error tolerance used by the integrator. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `IFLAG` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | IFLAG = a status parameter used principally for output. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `WORK` | unavailable | `DOUBLE PRECISION` (`explicit`) | `*mut f64` | rank 1; dimensions (NDW) | WORK(NDW) = floating point array used for internal storage. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NDW` | unavailable | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | WORK(NDW) = floating point array used for internal storage. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `IWORK` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | rank 1; dimensions (*) | IWORK(NDIW) = integer array used for internal storage. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NDIW` | unavailable | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | IWORK(NDIW) = integer array used for internal storage. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |
| `NEQIVP` | output | `INTEGER` (`explicit`) | `*mut crate::FortranInteger` | scalar | ALPHA(NIC+NEQIVP) = boundary conditions at XINITIAL. | none stated in the separable source sentence Leading dimension: not established Workspace: not established | required; null is not permitted for an ordinary Fortran actual argument |

The table reports compiler/interface facts separately from source-prologue semantics. Unknown intent, aliasing, workspace, leading-dimension, and retention rules remain explicit; parameter names alone are never treated as semantic evidence. Native code does not retain ordinary argument pointers unless a reviewed declaration explicitly says otherwise.
<!-- release-readiness:end -->

<!-- raw-api-status:start -->
## Raw Rust API status

This generated status is evidence only; see the [authoritative inventory](../../../generated/raw-api/routine-status.json).

- Public raw API status: `internal-subsidiary`
- ABI validation: `compiler-validated`
- Canonical Rust path: `not_promoted`
- Public declaration feature: `raw-ffi-numeric-array-subroutines`
- `all`-feature reachability: `not_enabled_by_all`
- Provider-backed callable symbol: `yes` (`observed_exactly_once`)
- Documentation status: `not_documented`
- Compile-test status: `compiler_observed`
- Link-test status: `passed`
- Runtime validation: `passed`
- Safe-wrapper status: `not_safely_wrapped`
- Exclusion or deferment reason: `source object has unresolved external procedure dependencies: dfmat_, dgvec_, duivp_, duvec_`
<!-- raw-api-status:end -->
